---
layout: post
title: "Robust Physics-Based Locomotion Using Low-Dimensional Planning"
date: 2015-12-20 18:02:45
category: Physical reasoning with dynamics models
---

{% reference Mordatch2010 %}

# Summary

How does an agent produce realistic-looking motion? Mordatch et al. propose a way to produce motion for 3D characters by optimizing a low-dimensional physical model. This is in contrast to previous approaches which either were highly specific to the type of motion (and therefore brittle), and/or relied on recorded demonstrated trajectories. This approach seems to work pretty well and can produce multiple types of motion (walking, running, standing, etc.)

# Methods

n/a

# Algorithm

The general approach that they take is:

1. Map the current state to a low-level physical model (e.g. an inverted pendulum)
2. Compute a "preview optimization" of the optimal plan for the low-level model
3. Convert the optimal plan to the full-body controller
4. The full-body controller produces torques which animate the character

The "preview model" that they use is based on the Spring-Loaded Inverted Pendulum (SLIP) and divides the plan into 6 phases: double stance, left single-stance, flight, double stance, right single-stance, and flight. By omitting certain phases, different behaviors emerge (e.g. omitting flight leads to walking).

The optimization is then done with respect to a "set of user-specified energy terms". These take the form of various parameters that the user can specify, such as step duration, step length, COM height, etc.

# Takeaways

It is really cool to see a low-level physics model work so well to produce motion. However, it's important to note that this is still fairly specific to locomotion for a humanoid (biped) character -- the inverted pendulum model, for example, probably wouldn't work for controlling a flying character. The authors have actually addressed this in a recent NIPS paper, in which they use a neural network to learn the appropriate dynamics for a range of characters:

http://www.eecs.berkeley.edu/~igor.mordatch/policy/index.html

It makes sense to me that motion planning should involve the use of a physical model of some sort. There's evidence for the cerebellum using physical knowledge for motion planning in the brain -- this is another one of my quals subtopics that I haven't quite gotten to yet, but perhaps I will read those papers next!
