---
layout: post
title:  "Humans integrate visual and haptic information in a statistically optimal fashion"
date:   2015-11-09 23:11:30
category: Probabilistic models of perception
---

{% reference Ernst2002 %}

# Summary

People get information from multiple modalities -- for example, from haptic feedback and from visual perception. Ernst & Banks asked, how do people decide which modality of information to rely on? Or, do they combine modalities, and if so, how do they weigh the respective information? They hypothesized that people perform a MLE estimate of the sensory information based on a weighted average of the information from each modality, and present quantitative fits for this model.

# Methods

There were three different experiments. In all the experiments, they had participants judge the height of a bar relative to a standard stimulus (i.e., judging whether the current stimulus is higher or lower than the standard one).

First, there were two experiments (visual-only and haptic-only) that they used to estimate the PSE (point of subjective equality) for each modality. These PSE estimates are a proxy for how much uncertainty people have. For the haptic-only experiment, there was no variance in the noise, while in the visual-only experiment, they varied the noise levels between 0 and 200%.

The third experiment combined haptic and visual feedback, and again varied the visual noise level.

# Algorithm

Assuming the noise in each modality is Gaussian with variance $\sigma_i^2$, then the MLE estimate of the percept is:

$$
\hat{S}=\sum_i w_i\hat{S}_i
$$

where

$$
w_i=\frac{1/\sigma_i^2}{\sum_j 1/\sigma_j^2}
$$

Assuming that the ratio of the visual weight to the haptic rate is the same as the ratio between the haptic and visual thresholds (PSEs), or $w_V/w_H=T_H^2/T_V^2$, then the weights are:

$$
w_V=1-w_H=\frac{T_H^2}{T_V^2+T_H^2}
$$

# Takeaways

Based on these experiments, it would seem that people seem to trade-off between different sources of information depending on how reliable that information is. If a normally reliable source of information (e.g., vision) becomes unreliable, then people will fall back on another source (e.g., haptic).

I have two main questions regarding this paper. First, why didn't they attempt to modulate the haptic feedback as well? Since that was constant, we don't actually know whether participants optimally trade-off between vision and haptic feedback -- only that they seem to appropriately modulate their reliance on visual information. It would be interesting to see if the same effect holds after introducing uncertainty into haptic feedback (perhaps making the participants wear gloves?).

Second, I'm not sure the choice of MLE/uniform prior is necessarily appropriate. Why not use MAP with a prior on the types of percepts people are likely to encounter? Even if the intuition is that the prior would be broad enough that it's essentially uniform (or is actually uniform), it would be better to motivate this and have some discussion about it.
