---
layout: post
title: "The Helmholtz machine"
date: 2016-01-02 18:25:21
category: Generative models
---

{% reference Dayan1995 %}

# Summary

In this paper, Dayan et al. propose a method for learning about the underlying structure in data using self-supervised learning in a neural network. Specifically, they construct the network to have bottom-up *recognition* weights and top-down *generative* weights. The network is then trained according to a *wake-sleep algorithm*, where the generative weights are trained during the "wake" phase and the recognition weights are trained during the "sleep" phase by simulating training examples from the generative model.

# Methods

n/a

# Algorithm

The recognition probability of unit $j$ in layer $\ell$ is:

$$
q_j^\ell(\phi,\mathbf{s}^{\ell-1})=\sigma\left(\sum_i s_i^{\ell-1}\phi_{i,j}^{\ell-1,\ell}\right)
$$

where $\sigma$ is the sigmoid function and $\phi$ are the recognition weights. As mentioned earlier, the recognition weights are trained during the sleep phase by simulating training data from the generative model.

The generative probability of unit $j$ in layer $\ell$ is:

$$
p_j^\ell(\theta,\mathbf{s}^{\ell+1})=\sigma\left(\sum_i s_i^{\ell+1}\theta_{i,j}^{\ell+1,\ell}\right)
$$

where $s$ are the unit activities. The generative model is trained by presenting data to input units and then activating units according to $q_j^\ell$. Then, the generative weights are updated to minimized the KL-divergence between the actual activations and the generative probabilities $p_j^\ell$.

The wake and sleep phases are computed iteratively and over time the weights should converge such that $Q(d)=P(\theta,d)$.

# Takeaways

The Helmholtz machine is a very cool idea, in that it is an unsupervised way of (approximately) learning highly complex structures by jointly training a recognition and generative model. This can be thought of as a way of implementing the EM algorithm in a neural network; it can also be interpreted as a particular type of autoencoder (e.g. if it is a one-layer Helmholtz machine, it is a folded-over autoencoder).
