---
layout: post
title: "Stable real-time deformations"
date: 2016-01-13 19:30:33
category: Physically-based animation
---

{% reference Muller2002 %}

# Summary

In this paper, Müller et al. introduce a stable method for deforming objects without increasing the volume of the object.

The *Finite Element Method* gives a function $F$ that converts deformations into elastic forces:

$$
\mathbf{f}_\mathrm{elastic}=F(\mathbf{x}-\mathbf{x}_0)
$$

where $\mathbf{x}$ is the deformed location of the element and $\mathbf{x}\_0$ is the original location of the element. The Jacobian of this matrix evaluated at $\mathbf{x}_0$ is called the *stiffness matrix*:

$$
K=\frac{\partial F}{\partial\mathbf{x}}(\mathbf{x}_0)
$$

In the linear case, $F$ is approximated by a first-order approximation, giving

$$
\mathbf{f}_\mathrm{elastic}=K\cdot(\mathbf{x}-\mathbf{x}_0)
$$

However, this assumes that the transformation between $\mathbf{x}_0$ and $\mathbf{x}$ is linear (i.e., no rotations). If this assumption is violated, because linear elastic forces are invariant under translations but not rotations, the resulting simulation will over-stretch.

To avoid this, Müller compute the forces in the original (unrotated) coordinate frame and then transform them back into the rotated coordinate frame:

$$
\mathbf{f}_\mathrm{elastic}=R_eK\cdot{}(R_e^{-1}\mathbf{x}-\mathbf{x}_0)
$$

where $R_e$ is a block matrix with the gobal rotation matrix $R_x$ repeated four times along the diagonal and zeros everywhere else (repeated once for each vertex). From this, they compute the force for the whole mesh by *warping* the stiffness matrix according to the rotation of each vertex. The force at vertex $i$ is then:

$$
\mathbf{f}_i=R_i\sum_{j=1}^n k_{ij}(R_i^{-1}\mathbf{x}_j-\mathbf{x}_{0j})
$$

where $R_i$ is the rotation matrix for vertex $i$. However, these *local* rotations aren't known (the global rigid-body rotation is known, but we want to know the local rotations which include the effect of deformation). Given the vectors for the original mesh ($\mathbf{u}$), and the vectors of the deformed/rotated mesh ($\mathbf{v}$), they compute:

$$
F_{ij}=\sum_{k=1}^N (\mathbf{n}_i\cdot{}\mathbf{u}_k)(\mathbf{n}_j\cdot{}\mathbf{v}_k)
$$

where $\mathbf{n}\_1$, $\mathbf{n}\_2$, and $\mathbf{n}\_3$ are the basis vectors of $\mathbb{R}^3$. Given $F$, they decompose it using SVD to get $F=USV^\top$, and then compute the rotation matrix as:

$$
R=VU^\top
$$
